# Discussion

In this paper, we present an assembly-free metagenome analysis framework for group association discovery that is minimally reliant on reference databases. 
Our approach uses k-mers to discover genomes associated with groups of metagenomes, and then recovers sequence variation from those genomes and closely related genomes in the metagenomes. 
These sequences are organized in a "metapangenome graph" which is then used to perform differential abundance analysis to discover specific genomic sequences that differ between groups.

We applied this method to perform a meta-analysis of fecal gut microbiome metagenomes from individuals with CD, UC, and nonIBD and uncovered cross-study microbial signatures of IBD subtype.
The underlying etiology of IBD remains poorly understood with inconsistent microbiological findings produced from different studies [@doi:10.1186/s12967-019-02174-1].
The signatures we identified demonstrate consistent loss of diversity of specific microorganisms, particularly in CD. 
Among the background of generalized loss of diversity, we observed that some genomic sequences increased in abundance while others decreased in abundance for five species in CD.
This pattern is consistent with strain switching, where one strain is more abundant in CD and another is more abundant in nonIBD.
For one species we identified, *R. gnavus*, this strain switching behavior was previously discovered via isolate sequencing and metagenome mapping [@doi:10.1186/s13073-017-0490-5]. 
Our recovery of this pattern demonstrates the utility of our approach for discovering sub-species level associations from metagenomic sequences alone, and opens the door for additional discovery.
Indeed, we identified four additional species where strain switching occurred in CD.

While our approach identified genomic sequences that were more abundant in CD than nonIBD, the nature of short read sequences precludes haplotype or lineage resolution directly from the metagenomic data analyzed here.
To circumvent this issue, we identified isolate genomes that encoded all of the genomic sequences that were more abundant in CD. 
These isolate genomes represent candidate organisms for further research into the microbial component of CD pathophysiology.
As high fidelity long read sequencing of microbiomes becomes increasingly common [@doi:10.1038/s41587-021-01130-z], long reads can be integrated into the approaches introduced here, enabling lineage-resolved association detection directly from sequencing data.

While we found conserved signatures in IBD subtype, we found no evidence for disease-specific sequences within the gut microbiome. 
The observation that almost all differentially abundant sequences for a given species occur in CD, UC, and nonIBD suggests the presence of ecotypes -- subspecies that are adapted to different environments -- rather than pathotypes -- subspecies associated with a specific disease.
These patterns in part explain the inconsistent results generated in IBD subtype characterization, where no consistent microbiological signal has emerged in human gut microbiomes other than loss of diversity [@doi:10.1186/s12967-019-02174-1]. 

<!-- I think this is a good point to include, but it doesn't really fit...does it fit well enough to include here as is? Would a different transition be nice? -->
Our models consistently performed the most poorly on the iHMP cohort. 
The iHMP tracked the emergence and diagnosis of IBD through time series profiling of emergent cases [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1237-9]. 
We selected the first sample in each time series for this analysis, and given the relatively poor performance of these models, this may suggest that disease onset is a distinct biological process. 
However, the inclusion of the iHMP cohort in this analysis ensured that not all nonIBD samples were healthy controls and some fraction were symptomatic cases that did not result in an IBD diagnosis [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1237-9].

While we apply our pipeline to IBD classification, it is extensible to other large meta cohorts of metagenomic sequencing data. 
This method may be particularly suitable for diseases such as colorectal cancer, where a recent meta-analysis using a marker gene approach was successful in classifying colorectal samples from healthy controls [@doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0406-6].
Our method may bring strain-level resolution and generate hypotheses for further research.

The methods we used to perform the k-mer association analysis are modular and may be improved by substituting parts of the pipeline with different approaches. 
For example, we used abundances from long nucleotide k-mers (*k* = 31) -- which capture species-level sequence similarity [@doi:10.1128/mSystems.00020-16] -- as our features.
K-mers constructed from protein or other reduced alphabets may improve accuracy, as we would expect more shared sequence content between metagenomes as well as a better representation of functional content [@doi:10.1101/2022.06.27.497795].
While this may improve classification accuracy, switching to reduced alphabet k-mers may not be desirable in the context of strain-specific differences which may be obscured by these degenerate representations. 
Similarly, while we used random forests to to perform k-mer association analysis, other machine learning or statistical techniques may improve classification accuracy. 
These approaches remain areas of future research.

The first part of the pipeline is disconnectable from the second part of the pipeline -- that is, the discovery of discriminatory genomes between groups is not a prerequisite for dominating set differential abundance analysis as query genomes could be selected arbitrarily.
Therefore, the assembly graph differential abundance approach presented here could be applied to metagenomes for samples originating from diverse environments. 
The requirements for the application of dominating set differential abundance are threefold. 
First, there must be sufficient samples for comparison (e.g., a minimum of three cases and three controls, with the typical caveats for small sample sizes [@doi:10.1261/rna.053959.115]). 
Second, we must have a genome with which to query the graph. 
And third, we must have sufficient compute resources to run spacegraphcats [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4].
These requirements make the application of dominating set differential abundance analysis available to metagenomes from diverse environments, not just the well-studied human gut microbiome. 

<!--
+ assembly graphs are rising in popularity as they accommodate the representation of pangenomic variants present outside of reference genomes. 
+ assembly graphs can be built with a combination of long and short reads or from long or short reads alone, so dominating set differential abundance analysis is a flexible method to compare groups of metagenomes that will accommodate the field as metagenome sequencing continues to improve
+ the framework is theoretically extensible to metatranscriptomes, but this remains a point of future research
-->

While we present an initial pipeline that enables differential abundance analysis directly on assembly graphs, we identified several areas where our approach could be improved.
First, implementing approaches to better control graph piece size would be beneficial.
We heuristically selected *r* = 10 to build the metapangenome graphs because this radius produced dominating set pieces with approximately the same number of k-mers as the average bacterial gene for pieces that were present in many metagenomes.
However, the radius needed to meet this condition may change depending on the diversity of the sequencing reads used to build the metapangenome graph.
Diversity increases with the complexity of the sequenced community, sequencing depth, and the number of communities observed.
Algorithms that either automatically select a radius that achieves a user-specified average piece size, or that produce more consistent piece sizes independent of diversity of the sequencing data would provide finer control of the graph structure and subsequent sequence comparisons.
Further, switching from a cDBG to a de Bruijn graph as the base spacegraphcats graph structure could lead to more consistent piece sizes; cDBGs have variable node sizes because they combine nodes without branching paths, while every node in a de Bruijn graph contains one k-mer. 
Second, improving RAM efficiency at high radii would enable more diversity to be represented in individual graphs.
In order to build the metapangenome graphs, we first hard-trimmed the input sequences to remove low abundance k-mers, thereby decreasing the RAM needed to construct each graph.
Algorithmic changes that improve RAM efficiency at high radii would obviate the need for hard trimming, and increase the amount of diversity that could be represented in a single graph. 
Similarly, improved performance would allow dominating set differential abundance analysis to be performed directly on groups of metagenomes without the need to first identify species of interest via genome queries.
