# Methods

All code associated with our analyses is available at [github.com/dib-lab/2020-ibd](www.github.com/dib-lab/2020-ibd/).

## IBD metagenome data acquisition and processing

We searched the NCBI Sequence Read Archive and BioProject databases for shotgun metagenome studies that sequenced fecal samples from humans with Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and healthy controls. 
We included studies sequenced on Illumina platforms with paired-end chemistries and with sample libraries that contained greater than one million reads. 
For time series intervention cohorts, we selected the first time point to ensure all metagenomes came from treatment-naive subjects. 

We downloaded metagenomic FASTQ files from the European Nucleotide Archive using the "fastq_ftp" link and concatenated fast files annotated as the same library into single files. 
We also downloaded iHMP samples from idbmdb.org.
We used Trimmomatic (version 0.39) to adapter trim reads using all default Trimmomatic paired-end adapter sequences (`ILLUMINACLIP:{inputs/adapters.fa}:2:0:15`) and lightly quality-trimmed the reads (`MINLEN:31 LEADING:2 TRAILING:2 SLIDINGWINDOW:4:2`) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170]. 
We then removed human DNA using BBMap and a masked version of hg19 [@url:http://seqanswers.com/forums/archive/index.php/t-42552.html]. 
Next, we trimmed low-abundance k-mers from sequences with high coverage using khmer's `trim-low-abund.py` [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.6924.1].  

Using these trimmed reads, we generated FracMinHash signatures for each library using sourmash (k-size 31, scaled 2000, abundance tracking on) [@doi:10.21105/joss.00027]. 
FracMinHash sketching produces compressed representations of k-mers in a metagenome while retaining the sequence diversity in a sample [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.19675.1; @doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838].
This approach creates a consistent set of k-mers across samples by retaining the same k-mers when the same k-mers were observed. 
This enables comparisons between metagenomes.
We refer to FracMinHash sketches as *signatures*, and to each sub-sampled k-mer in a signature as a *k-mer*. 
At a scaled value of 2000, an average of one k-mer will be detected in each 2000 base pair window, and 99.8% of 10,000 base pair windows will have at least one k-mer representative. 
We selected a k-mer size of 31 because of its species-level specificity [@doi:10.1128/mSystems.00020-16].
We retained all k-mers that were present in multiple samples. 

## Principle Coordinate Analysis

We used Jaccard distance and angular similarity as implemented in `sourmash compare` to pairwise compare FracMinHash signatures. 
We then used the `dist()` function in base R to compute distance matrices. 
We used the `cmdscale()` function to perform principle coordinate analysis [@doi:10.2307/2333639]. 
We used ggplot2 and ggMarginal to visualize the principle coordinate analysis [@doi:10.21105/joss.01686]. 
To test for sources of variation in these distance matrices, we performed PERMANOVA using the `adonis` function in the R vegan package [@{https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan}].
The PERMANOVA was modeled as `~ diagnosis + study accession + library size + number of k-mers`.

## Random forests classifiers

<!-- We built random forests classifiers to predict CD, UC, and non-IBD status using scaled MinHash signatures (k-mer models), marker genes in the shared 41 genomes (marker gene models), signatures from reads that were detected as marker genes (k-mer models of marker genes), and marker genes in the full metagenome (full marker gene models). -->

We built random forests classifiers to predict CD, UC, and non-IBD status using FracMinHash signatures.
We transformed sourmash signatures into a k-mer (hash) abundance table where each metagenome was a sample, each k-mer was a feature, and abundances were recorded for each k-mer for each sample. 
We normalized abundances by dividing by the total number of k-mers in each FracMinHash signature. 
We then used a leave-one-study-out validation approach where we trained six models, each of which was trained on five studies and validated on the sixth.
We built each model six times, each time using a different random seed.
To build each model, we first performed vita variable selection on the training set as implemented in the Pomona and ranger packages [@doi:10.1093/bib/bbx124; @doi:10.18637/jss.v077.i01]. 
Vita variable selection reduces the number of variables (e.g. k-mers) to a smaller set of predictive variables through selection of variables with high cross-validated permutation variable importance [@doi:10.1007/s11634-016-0276-4].
It is based on permutation of variable importance, where p-values for variable importance are calculated against a null distribution that is built from variables that are estimated as non-important [@doi:10.1007/s11634-016-0276-4].
This approach retains important variables that are correlated [@doi:10.1007/s11634-016-0276-4; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz149], which is desirable in omics-settings where correlated features are often involved in a coordinated biological response, e.g. part of the same operon, pathways, or genome [@doi:10.1126/science.1087447; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkf388]. 
Using this smaller set of k-mers, we then built an optimized random forests model using tuneRanger [@doi:10.1002/widm.1301]. 
We evaluated each validation set using the optimal model, and extracted variable importance measures for each k-mer for subsequent analysis. 
To make variable importance measures comparable across models, we normalized importance to 1 by dividing variable importance by the total number of k-mers in a model and the total number of models.  

<!-- For the marker gene models, we generated marker gene abundances for 14 ribosomal marker genes and 16S rRNA using singleM [@woodcroft2018singlem].
We then followed the same model building procedure as the k-mer models. -->
 
## Anchoring predictive k-mers to genomes

We used sourmash `gather` with parameters `k 31` and `--scaled 2000` to anchor predictive k-mers to known genomes [@doi:10.21105/joss.00027]. 
Sourmash `gather` searches a database of known k-mers for matches with a query [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838].
We used the sourmash GTDB rs202 representatives data base (https://osf.io/w4bcm/download).
To calculate the cumulative variable importance attributable to a single genome, we used an iterative winner-takes-all approach.
The genome with the largest fraction of predictive k-mers won the variable importance for all k-mers contained within its genome.
These k-mers were then removed, and we repeated the process for the genome with the next largest fraction of predictive k-mers. 
To genomes that were predictive in all models, we took the union of predictive genomes from the 36 models.
We filtered this set of genomes to contain only those genomes with a cumulative normalized variable importance greater than 1%.

## *r*-dominating sets

The original spacegraphcats publication defined the dominating set as a set of nodes in the  compact de Bruijn graph (cDBG) such that every node is a distance-1 neighbor of a node in the dominating set [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4].
However, the algorithms as implemented allow this distance to be flexible and tunable [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4].
We refer to the largest distance that any node may be from a member of the dominating set as the *radius*, *r*. 
Increasing the radius increases the average piece size while reducing the total number of pieces in the graph.

## Genome neighborhood queries with spacegraphcats

To recover sequence variation associated with genomes that were correlated with IBD subtype, we used spacegraphcats `search` to retrieve k-mers in the compact de Bruijn graph neighborhood of each genomes (*k* = 31, *r* = 1) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02066-4]. 
We then used spacegraphcats `extract_reads` to retrieve the reads and `extract_contigs` to retrieve unitigs in the cDBG that contained those k-mers, respectively.
<!-- These reads were used to generate marker gene abundances for the 41 shared genomes for the marker gene random forests models. -->

## Construction of the metapangenome graph

After retrieving genome neighborhood sequences from each metagenome, we combined these sequences to build a single metapangenome graph (*r* = 10, *k* = 31).
We increased the radius of the metapangenome graph to produce larger level 1 dominating set pieces and to overcome highly articulated cDBGs resulting from an abundance of sequencing data.
While working with single-species metapangenome graphs from many metagenomes reduced the graph size compared working with complete metapangenome graphs, we performed two preprocessing steps prior to the metapangenome graph generation.
We combined all genome query neighborhood reads and performed digital normalization and then truncated reads at k-mer that was not present in the data set at least 4 times.
These are heuristic steps that we believe are unlikely to remove biologically important sequences.

## Annotating the metapangenome graph

We implemented an approach to annotate dominating set pieces in spacegraphcats assembly graph.
This approach is implemented in spacegraphcats as `multifasta_queries`. 
This approach relies on k-mer overlap between sequences in a reference multifasta file and nodes in the cDBG and is executed in a two-step approach.
First, `search.index_cdbg_by_multifasta.py` identifies all cDBG nodes that match to the k-mers in a FASTA sequence and promotes those annotations to all cDBG records in the dominating set piece.
Then, `search/extract_cdbg_by_multifasta.py` extracts and summarizes information about these annotations and outputs it to a CSV file.

We applied this annotation approach to the metapangenome graphs for species that were more abundant in CD.
To generate a reference multifasta gene file to transfer annotations from, we first downloaded all genomes of the species represented in the metapangenome graph and in the GTDB rs202 database.
We annotated open reading frames (ORFs) in these genomes using bakta [@doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000685], combined and clustered predicted ORFs using cdhit-est [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btl158], and performed ortholog annotation using eggnog [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1085].

## Calculating abundances metagenome abundances of dominating set nodes in the metapangenome graph

We implemented an approach to calculate k-mer abundances for each graph piece in the level 1 dominating set.
This approach is implemented in spacegraphcats in `search/count_dominator_abundance.py`.
Using a spacegraphcats assembly graph and a set of reads from a metagenome, the abundance of each dominating set piece is calculated by summing the abundance of every k-mer in that piece within the metagenome. 

We applied this abundance estimation approach to each metapangenome graph, estimating the abundance of each dominating set piece within each metagenome.

## Performing dominating set differential abundance analysis

We used Corncob to perform dominating set differential abundance analysis [@doi:10.1214/19-aoas1283]. 
Corncob tests for differential relative abundance in the presence  of variable sequencing depth and excessive zeroes for unobserved observations, conditions which occur in abundances from dominating sets [@doi:10.1214/19-aoas1283]. 
To focus on the most common sequencing variants and to reduce runtimes, we first filtered to dominating set pieces that were present in at least 100 (16.5%) metagenomes; corncob fits a model to each dominating set piece, so it does not require abundance information for all pieces. 
We performed differential abundance testing using the `bbdml()` function using a likelihood ratio test with `formula = ~ study_accession + diagnosis` and `formula_null = ~study_accession`. 
We estimated the number of k-mers in the quality controlled metagenome reads using ntcard and used this as the denominator. 
We performed Bonferroni p value correction and used a significance cut off of 0.05.

To analyze the results of dominating set differential abundance analysis, we combined the significantly differentially abundant piece information with the results from the mulitfasta query annotations, and with the ortholog annotations for the multifasta query genomes.
We focused our analysis on KEGG orthologs. 
When a single gene was annotated by eggnog with multiple KEGG orthologs, we selected the first match.
We identified the set of KEGG orthologs that were annotated among pieces that increased in abundance and pieces decreased in abundance in CD compared to nonIBD.
To identify single copy marker genes within this set, we used the marker gene sequences with an average copy of one in [@doi:10.1186/s13059-015-0610-8].
We then selected at least one marker gene for each species, focusing on `rpl` sequences that were only annotated on two differentially abundant pieces in the graph (*Enterocloster clostridioformis*, *rplT*; *Ruminococcus_B gnavus*, *rplQ*; *Enterocloster clostridioformis_A*, *rplO*, *rplC*; *Enterocloster sp005845215*, *rplO*; *Enterocloster bolteae*, *rplC*).
We queried with the marker gene sequence that was used to perform the multifasta annotation and extracted the reads associated with that graph piece using `spacegraphcats extract_reads`.
We then mapped the extracted reads back to the query sequence using `bwa mem` [@doi:10.48550/arXiv.1303.3997].
We visualized alignments in the Integrative Genomics Viewer [@doi:10.1093/bib/bbs017] and selected reads that overlapped the same coordinates in the reference gene but that had different complements of single nucleotide polymorphisms.
We BLASTed these reads using blastn against the NCBI nr database and found the best strain-level matches.

We next identified KEGG orthologs that were only annotated in the either the pieces that were increased or decreased in abundance in CD compared to nonIBD.
We performed KEGG enrichment analysis using clusterProfiler `enricher` [@doi:10.1089/omi.2011.0118], using TERM2GENE as all KEGG orthologs with pathway mappings and with argument `maxGSSize = 500`. 
We considered pathways enriched to be enriched which had adjusted p values < 0 .05.
Lastly, we searched for the presence of KEGG orthologs that quench reactive oxygen species using orthologs defined in [@doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2019.03.032].

## Searching for isolates that contained differentially abundant genomic sequences

To identify isolate genomes that contained sequences that were in CD, we searched the GTDB rs202 database. 
We generated FracMinHash signatures (k = 31, scaled = 2000) of differentially abundant sequences using sourmash `sketch`. 
We searched GTDB rs202 using sourmash `search`, using parameter `--max-containment`.
We filtered results to only include isolate genome sequences (e.g., removed metagenome-assembled genomes) and selected the top match as the best match.

## Searching for metagenomes that contained differentially abundant genome sequences

We intersected FracMinHash signatures (*k* = 31, scaled = 2000) of differentially abundant sequences and query neighborhoods for each genome query, producing hashes that were differentially abundant and observed within each metagenome.
We combined these hashes across diagnosis conditions (CD, UC, and nonIBD) and used the complexUpset R package to visualize the intersection size across conditions.
