# Supplementary information

![
**Phylogenetic tree of 360 bacterial species that were predictive of IBD subtype in all models.** Tree was built from the GTDB rs202 tree with all tips except those represented by the 360 genomes removed. Tree tips are labelled by genomes that anchored at least 1% of the normalized variable importance. The inner ring annotates the rank of the genomes, with the genome holding the most normalized variable importance across models ranked as 1. The outer ring is the species name within the GTDB database.
](images/genome360.png "tree"){#fig:tree tag = "S1"}

![
**Fifty-four genomes are important across models and anchor the majority of variable importance.**.
The bottom panel depicts a heat map of the scale variable importance contributed by k-mers that anchored to each of the top 54 genomes that were important for predicting IBD subtype. 
Models are labelled by the validation study and by the random seed used to build the model.Rank corresponds to the genome that anchored the most variable importance. 
Rank:species can be decoded using the tree in **Figure @fig:tree**. The top panels depict bar charts that correspond to the minimum (lower) or maximum (upper) variable importance a genome could anchor. 
The minimum variable importance was estimated following the sourmash gather algorithm, where each important k-mer was assigned to only one genome, and the genome it was assigned to was determined by a greedy winner-takes-all approach. 
Therefore, in the minimum bar chart, variable importance attributable to a k-mer was only summed once per k-mer, even if that k-mer occurred in multiple genomes. 
The maximum variable importance was estimated by allowing k-mers to be anchored to multiple genomes, so all k-mers were assigned to all possible genomes even if that meant a k-mer was assigned multiple times.
](images/varimp54.png){#fig:varimp tag = "S2"}

![**Pathways that were enriched among sets of differentially abundant sequences in CD compared to nonIBD**. The x axis represents the number of orthologs identified in the pathway, while the y axis annotates the pathway. Top: Some dominating set pieces that significantly increased in abundance were annotated as the same KEGG orthologs as dominating set pieces that were significantly decreased in abundance. Many of these pathways encode core functions. Middle: KEGG pathway enrichment from KEGG ortholog annotations that were only observed in dominating set pieces that were significantly increased in abundance in CD. Bottom: KEGG pathway enrichment from KEGG ortholog annotations that were only observed in dominating set pieces that were significantly decreased in abundance in CD. 
](images/sig_ccs_enrichment.png){#fig:enrichment height=9in tag = "S3"}

![
**Most differentially abundant sequences occur in metagenomes of individuals diagnosed with CD, UC and non-IBD.** Upset plot of k-mers that were decreased in abundance in CD and their occurrence in CD, UC, and nonIBD metagenomes.
The bottom half of the plot highlights which diagnoses are included in each set, while the bar chart in the top half of the plot shows the number of k-mers that were observed in that set.
The bar chart is colored by the metapangenome species graph in which the sequence was differentially abundant.
](images/dda_kmers_shared_across_diagnosis_upset_decreased_supplemental.png){#fig:exclusive2 tag = "S4"}